                               WORKFARM.TXT
                        Arthur Norman, April 2025


This is a scheme supported by CSL but not the other platforms. It is
intended to provide a framework for exploiting multi-core CPUs. The
facilities are supported on Linux and macOS but not (native) Windows,
and under cygwin the overheads may be severe.

The idea here is that a function open-fork() can create a clone of the
current state of the running Reduce session, with all the function
definition and all the values of variables that the user has set up.

The send-to-fork() can transmit a Lisp form to that clone for
evaluation there. In due course read-from-fork() can recover the result
or possibly other data that the remote task wanted to send back. It is
possible to test if a reply is waiting or to do a blocking read that
will wait until it is.

So data can be provided to a worker in two manners. Anything present in
the system when open-fork() is called is automatically available, and
the worker can access it pretty well effortlessly. There is obviously some
latency in setting up the new process there. The memory for that new process
starts off all just shared with its parents, but any time anything is
updated the relevent page of memory is copied. The scheme is known as
"copy on write" and the effect is that read access to even huge amounts of
data is quite cheap.
Then as a separate procedure data can be sent using send-to-fork() and that
has to involve converting whatever data is involved into a stream of bytes
at the send end and reconstructing it at the other. The cost of this will
clearly depend on the amount of data to be shipped.
When several tasks are sent to a worker in succession its state is preserved
from one request to the next. This can sometimes be used so that one
initial transfer sends bulky data that several subsequent requests work on.

The values returned by workers to the process that created them has to be
sent as a stream of bytes (or characters) and this will mean that in general
one wants the cost to the worker in creating it to exceed its size if
the transmission cost leaves the whole procedure making sense.

Further than returning a data value it will be important that the parent
process reads exactly all the bytes of a response so that it leaves the
communication channel from the child empty. This requrement is so that
after reading one response the parent can review channels from all
children and respond next to one that has available data. Any unread
data left over from a previous communication could make it seem as if
there was the start of a follow-on message. So data that it returned
must be sent using send_fork_reply() and that must interact with
get_from_fork() to satisfy this requirement. For a first implementation
I will make the transmission a normal Lisp s-expression as rendered by
print() and decoded by read(), but with a newline and then an escape
character (U+001b) appended to signal the end of transmission. On reading
the newline will at least sometimes be absorbed just as part of reading the
expression. But then I can scan until I read the escape.

Note that for data sent from the parent to a child process that the child
will only have one source for work, so it is reasonable for it to try
reading and block - So I do not put in extra marker characters when I
send data in that direction.

If things get out of step in any way the whole system may well just
gum up. And the sequence in which workers complete their tasks can not
be guaranteed. The latencies and bandwidth costs of synchronization and
communication mean that this will all work if the data that needs to
be transmitted is kept modest and each task that is launched will take
a while to complete. In the worst case each spawned task will use as
much memory as a single copy of Reduce, and at present the system does not
have any refined tuning to control this: possibly command line options
"--kmax NNN" or the synonym "--maxmem NNN" which should prevent any one
process from using more than (about) that amount will be useful.

The file "workfarm.tst" here is not badged as an offical test script
to be used for regression testing because it is the essence of concurrency
that the exact output it generates may vary from system to system and even
from run to run. But it may form a useful template for anybody wanting to
experiment with this facility.


