                      Standard Lisp vs. Common Lisp



The sources of CSL have many instances of "#ifdef COMMON" which guard
a variant of the code that provides partial Common Lisp comatability.
The amount of pain that would be involved in matching the full Common Lisp
specifiaction would be large even if I did not really dislike many of the
choices made by those who specified that. But here are some notes on
the issues that are present and where I might at some stage consider
better convergence:

(1) Common Lisp supports more data types that Standard Lisp.
  (1.1) short, single and long floats as well as doubles
  (1.2) ratios and complex numbers
  (1.3) vectors of bits
I am in the process of making the code to support those work in the Standard
Lisp version. The consequence is a marginal slow-down in some parts of (eg)
generic arithmetic. However Common Lisp tends to default to single precision
floats and that would be unacceptable for Standard Lisp.
  (1.4) characters
  (1.5) non-simple strings
  (1.6) multi-dimensional arrays, offset arrays and other messy things
  (1.7) the Common Lisp Object system
I view these as either gratuitous complication, as clashing with Standard Lisp
usage in a way that would eb hard to resolve or just too much work to support.

(2) Multiple values, keyword arguments, local declarations, lexical scopes
I probably now understand how to make an implementation of multiple values that
has low overhead, and so should implement it. Keyword arguments make the
interpreter much messier but with luck the costs only arise when they are
used. Local declarations and lexical scoping for interpreted code have bad
effects on the complication and probably the cost of the interpreter, but
may now count as affordable. Full support for lexical closures when functions
are passed as values is a mess but again one I should face up to. I am not
working on these yet but might at some stage.

(3) (car nil) = (cdr nil) = nil
In the current code the Common Lisp insistence on this leads to a pile of
ugly code that adds at least incremental inefficiency. I can probably re-work
things so that the cost only hits in the case that somebody performs the bad
operation. I think if I do that it will clean up the code somewhat, but I am
not making it a priority.

(4) Common Lisp and Standard Lisp have quite different understanding of
just what EQ, EQUAL, READ and PRINT do. It is not going to be possible or
sensible to bring them into agreement! The fact that in Common Lisp the names
of all the built-in functions are spelt in upper case seems truly archaic
and ugly these days and I really do not want to support that ever.

(5) The Common Lisp package system is something that is simultaneously a real
mess and at least an improvement on having a single flat name-space. I may
wish to enable it for everybody?

(6) in Common Lisp the default standard output may be a synonym stream and
a variety of related bits of generality there risk adding overhead to
all uses. I have mixed feelings!

(7) Full Common Lisp specifies a HUGE number of functions that Standard Lisp
does not, from the LOOP macro, through a complicated range of operations on
sequences, printing controlled by format strings, ... and given that for Reduce
purposes these are really not needed the effort in implementing them would be
pretty much a waste. Also from my perspective many of them have ugly
specifications (eg with many keyword arguments or gratuitous, unnecessary
generality) so they feel offensive. Eg the ability to print not just Roman
numerals but also old-style Roman numerals in the formatting code seems
absurd, and the arrangements for LOOP are neither really consistent with the
rest of Common Lisp nor very clearly specified.

(8) There are cases where both Common and Standard Lisp provide a facility but
the name of the function involved is different. Where I can support both names
I will perhaps do so. But in some cases there are name clashes. If the name
clash is one just withing the Reduce sources I may rename functions there to
reduce pain.

Anyway my general plan is to try to reduce the number of places that the
source code here goes "#ifdef COMMON" both to tidy things up and move slightly
towards compatibility. However the parallel system Jlisp (the Java-coded
Standard Lisp) is less liable to pick up these developments...

                                                                ACN July 2015
